## Project Overview

In this business intelligence project, I build a database for an online and take-out pizzeria. The bespoke database's tables and views are built to store data generated by the business and make it available for monitoring business performance in three main areas.

1. Orders
2. Inventory 
3. Staff Management

The end result of this project is a database with the appropriate tables and views with the following data that can be displayed on a business dashboard using a BI tool:

## Orders

1. Total orders
2. Total sales
3. Total products
4. Average order value
5. Sales by category
6. Top-selling products
7. Orders by hour
8. Sales by hour
9. Order by address
10. Order by delivery or pickup

## Inventory

1. Total quantity by ingredient
2. Total cost of ingredients
3. Calculated cost of pizza
4. Percentage of stock remaining by ingredient
5. List of ingredients to re-order based on remaining inventory

## Staff Management

1. Total staff cost
2. Total hours worked
3. Hours worked by staff members
4. Cost per staff member

## Tools

1. Excel: Data cleaning and formatting
2. MySQL Workbench

## Preliminary Table Design and Normalisation

After taking an initial look at the data in Excel, I designed tables with appropriate fields addressing data from the data source. At this point, the tables were chunky with a lot of repetition, so I normalised the data by creating tables for repeated and related data, such as a table for addresses, customers, and products with their primary keys, which replaced the repeated data as a foreign key on the original table.
At the end of this step, we have 10 tables.

## Define the final table with relationships, and then create the tables in the database.

I work on the preliminary table design, specifying the field data types and characteristics, and then connect and draw the relationships between the tables. Then I create the tables in the database with the characteristics all set out.

## Clean the data in Excel and import it into the database.

Going through the source files in Excel, I noticed a few columns that were not in the right format for SQL. For example, the date of the order, which was going to be a datetime datatype, was not in the right format. After cleaning the data, I imported them into their appropriate tables in the database.

## Create views for data on the dashboard.

Utilising joins and subqueries, I created four views for each page of the dashboard dedicated to one of the main focus areas.
I used SQL functions and arithmetic operations to create required columns, such as a column for the remaining weight of ingredients in the inventory and staff cost calculated using the shift start time, end time, and hourly rate.

### The syntax used in this project has been made available.
